My name's Jewel Willie. It's the 12th of March 2024 and I'm at the home of Mr. Ron Stokes,
where he lives near Howey. So Ron, thanks very much for agreeing to have a chat with
me. First of all, Ron, I've got to ask you this question. What's your year of birth?
My year of birth is 4th of the 6th, 1924.
My word. We'll work it out from there then. And where were you born, Ron?
I was born near St. DeWolder in a little place called Cap-a-Lon.
So would that be Shropshire?
Shropshire, yeah.
And what do you remember of your early years? Were you born on a farm?
No, I was born in a little cottage, you know, where my father was employed by the owner of the
farm. I see. And what do you remember of your early years growing up in the cottage?
I remember quite a lot really. I remember having pneumonia when I was about 3 to 4.
I can remember in those days the horses and wagons going down to the harvest,
collecting the harvest. And because my father was a wagoner, I thought, well, unlucky I was to be
laying in bed, you know, not able to enjoy myself riding on one of the wagons, you know.
I see. And what do you remember about the cottage itself, where you were born and grew up?
It was a very small cottage, you know, just about one room and a big landing up and that was it.
And did you have many friends in Shropshire? Was it a village, a small village?
Yes, a small village, yes.
I see. So where would the nearest place be?
Nearest place would be Knighton or Bucknell or Llan.
You know, either of those were about almost equal distances apart, you know.
And what was it like growing up in a fairly rural area like that? What sort of things did you do
when you were a young boy? In those days, there were very few.
I grew up in a car to the village. We grew up in French, played games like hounds and heirs and
things like that, you know. And generally played in the big thing with a football match between
our school and the next school down from Bucknell down. And we took part in that like.
And what about school days? Did you have a school in the village?
A school in the village was a Church of England school. It was a teacher for two sisters
from Upper Chapel in Breconwy. And they were very good teachers
and interested in anything you were. And if you were good, they really had it most things like,
you know, they were quite helpful, crowded indeed.
Oh, that sounds good. And then when you moved on, say, to secondary school,
did you go to a secondary school in the area? No, I didn't go to secondary school.
I see. We moved from Chapelona up to Dulley, which is
and Benny born to Blenver. And the other schoolmaster was very strict and kept us in order.
So you went to school in Dulley, did you? Yeah, the one which is now the little old one,
which I think is a converted house. We came up when I was aged 11, you know, and
and that was I took 11 plus and I passed, but I didn't go to school because in those days from
there, you had to go to Bishop's Castle to the school there, like, you know, and anyway, that was it.
How are we doing? We're doing fine. And did your people move onto a farm? Did they? In Dulley?
Did you move to live in a farm in Dulley? We moved to live with my parents on a small farm, you know,
and I spent all my school days in Dulley and that was it. I see. And what sort of a farm was it?
A sheep farm? A small farm. During wartime, of course, you had to sew crops that, you know,
you would normally look at everybody had to grow so many much more acreage of potatoes, for example,
you know, and things like that and cereal crops, you know, so that they could feed
animals with it rather than depend on imported stuff. So what was life on the farm like for you,
Ron? Did you have your jobs? Did you have your chores? Is that where you worked?
Did you have your jobs and your chores? Oh, yeah. Water was fetched from a well, you know,
for household use, you know, things like that. We all had to help, you know, and do a bit
where we could, you know. What was the name of the farm? The Mountain Farm.
The Humminest Farm.
The Mountain Farm. Right, right. What else did you have to do on the farm then? Were you busy
with the animals? We took part in most things like harvesting, you know, and everything involved with
the farm, you know. Children who grew up on a farm were usually involved in this quite a bit.
And most things like that.
That's right. And the community of Dali itself, was it quite a close community? Did you have many
friends? Well, they were scattered in those days. Of course, everybody had to travel by a cycle,
you know, and that sort of thing. And they didn't get together as they could have done. In the
summertime, the lads used to gather at the local village hall and they played arts or something
like that. I see. Right. Did you ever go into any other bigger towns for entertainment and fun?
Not in those days, no. Entertainment was nothing until I was a teenager and, you know, I'd go to
cinema at Lendard and also the playhouse at Lendard, which was run by a company that was
sort of organised by a local cross-gate man. He had property in Cross-Gate, I should say.
That sounds a bit of fun. And then, when did you, I understand you were an AA
person. Yeah. When did you join the AA? Before I left school.
Hi. Sorry about that. That's all right. Sorry about that. Right, we'll start again.
You're fine. But when you left school? When I left school, yes. I went to work on a farm,
you know, and I could work it over as well, you know, to help with the farm. And
I left school when I was fourteen and I went to the farm and I was there for thirteen years
working on that, you know. And I progressed from sort of the smaller young, the jobs they give to
the younger lads and to the, then I finished up driving the tractors and the caterpillar,
caterpillar tractor.
You were talking about tractors, I believe, Ron. Perhaps you could embellish on that a little bit.
I finished up there at the farm, you know, for the last three or four years driving the caterpillar
tractors, which were working on what they called reclaimed ground, you know, mountain sides ploughed
up, you know, and kind of the, you know, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the,
mountain sides ploughed up, you know, and cultivated and new seeded grass was on them
and of course more productive than the old firner, brecon and that, you know, so. And at
the end of 1958 I thought I'd try another job. I joined the AA in that period and I went to
nothing more than a training course and three weeks and I came, I served with the AA then for
37 years, a correction, 35 years and seven months.
You've got that exactly, haven't you? Yes. And where were you based? Were you just based locally?
Home based, from my home, you know, and just in the, Pennybunk when I started,
first road I went over was the Reader to Kington Road and then of course I went on
St. Paul's in there and I went on to recovery business in 1974 and I shut the door.
Right, when you first started, Ron, can you remember when you first started in the AA?
I'm sure it was very different then from how it is now. Were you patrolling on a motorbike then?
On a motorbike in St. Charles, yeah. That was what they called the road service outfit in those days.
Then, you know, through the bad winters over the random forests, you know, when
drifts of snow could be, they were one year 18 feet deep, which takes a bit of following today.
And you had to patrol the roads and be out and about and give a road weather report
by eight o'clock in the morning, get it into the car, they put it in like so. You had to keep moving.
And these reports, Ron, were they done by radio or by telephone?
No, they had to be done by telephone, you know, in the early days, like, you know, yeah.
So what was your job then to patrol and see, you know?
You had to, first of all, road conditions, you know. The main job of a patrol was,
looking after the association's members who were, and if they were broken down, you did your best to
help them and get them back on the road again and that was it.
And how did you know if they were actually broken down? What communication was there?
In the early days, it was by chance or somebody would come along and say,
there's somebody broken down along the area, you know, that sort of thing.
And that's it.
And in the case of perhaps a serious mishap, presumably you had to work then with the other
emergency services, did you?
Any serious mishap happened over the days. You know, you combined with the,
you assisted the police, you know, fire brigade, everything like that.
And it was just like, you know, and then of course, the years went by that service
improved and progressed, you know, and you were doing recovery jobs.
They introduced this service, which when a member was broken down, if he couldn't get him going,
he was relayed or recovered to his home address or, you know, or a garage, wherever he went, he'd go.
So in the early days, Ron, he really had no immediate contact, did you? I mean,
there were no such things as mobile phones.
Not in those days, no. Later on, as the years went by, we went on to radios, you know,
but in any area such as this, the reception was pretty good, but, you know, we had to put our own
mast up for it, you know, and do it that way. Where was the mast? On the Radnor Forest?
No, the mast was on Babur Wood at Leneglus, over that way.
I see. And occasionally we'll see an old AA box, as we call them. Now, they used to be very prolific,
I remember, when I was younger. What function exactly did they have?
Well, that was a function. They had a telephone in it, and there was a list of all places of the assistance they could get,
and it was lit up at night by the old Tilly or Aladdin lamps, you know, and they were the
responsibility of the patrol on the road to make sure that lamp was lit, so if a member broke down
in that area, you know, and there was something there he could walk to, and the phone, of course,
where he could contact and get further out. And was this service available 24 hours?
24 hours of service to all its members, you know. So when you went to somebody's assistance, you had to
carry all your tools, presumably, with you? When we went to somebody's assistance, we had the tools in
this headcar portion, box portion, and that's all the tools in there, and that was it, like, you know.
I see. And can you recall any particular incidences? Do any incidences stand out in your mind
that you had to attend? Well, I remember being on a job in Merthyr
and doing the work there, and I stripped the carburettor down on the roadside, and, you know,
just in the back of my van, and I was getting all spread out there, and, you know, seeing this carburettor,
there was a blockage tucked away in one of the little ports of the carb, and then to my order,
a mass of people came out, the bingo had finished up the road, and they came and they were
streaming down into town, and they were going, and I thought, heavens above, they were dodging down
the side of my van, and I thought, I'm gonna be lucky if I have half the parts to complete this job.
And did you manage? Oh, I could have started out, yeah.
Yeah, you know, with the job of being, when you had to, you know, improvise and, you know, make do,
you know, with what you could find to fix it, you know, all sorts of things like you do, you know,
you'd use a prep, you know, if you wanted a clip or anything, you know,
and I know there's lots of things you could do, like, and, like, if you were to leak in petrol tank,
you know, you'd get it in, the petrol would be pouring out, but you'd have to
jack the vehicle up as high as you could to send the petrol, the fluid that was in the tank
to the front of the tank, and then I'd get a self-tapping screw with fiber water and a cement,
you know, and tighten that into the tank, and it stopped leaking, and they could go on their way up
and get seen to it for opportunity. So, above all, you had to be versatile, I'm sure.
You were, okay, you mentioned Mirth at Sidville now, you were obviously sent further afield.
Oh, yes, but when the service was better known and people used to use it, you could find yourself
anywhere, you know. I'd be around at night, you know, on an evening shift, and then there were
night jobs in the evening, you know, and you'd be running late, and we'd get to some people's houses,
and they would insist that you have a coming in every couple of days, and, you know, and they would
say to me, how far are you going to go home? And I would mention my own town of Landon, where I'd
moved to, and then, and I'd say, they'd say, you poor lad, you're going to go all that way home,
surely you could stay down here for the night. And did you, did you often stay? No, I never stayed,
I always went back home, in many cases, yeah, and in the recovery business, when we were in the
Lourdes, you know, we'd get Lourdes, and, you know, and we went from the motorcycle accommodations to
minivans, then on to, to bigger vans like Transits, and then, of course, we went, with the recovery
service, we had Land Rovers, and the Transit, the one in 19th, you know, which were a bigger van,
and also Lourdes, you know, Ford, Transit, Traders, and that sort of thing, you know,
and Bedford, and you'd land up, yeah.
Yes, things certainly moved on, and do you remember anything else that happened of note,
any other jobs? Again, you've mentioned the Merther one, you know, there must be a few more.
I can remember starting from Beulah, with a vehicle on board, a lady wanted to go to a gold
and wedding anniversary celebration in Manchester, you know, she'd broken down, and
I started off from Beulah, went all the way to Clowes Top, which is the Kidderminster,
you know, Budely Road, like that, and I found myself suddenly in snow, and here it covered the
clentils, and there were drifts up to two and a half to three foot deep in places, and I went over
the top, and knowing what could be any of me, and it was, you know, the road completely blocked with
traffic, six cars, either over the edge or on top of the edge between there,
and Budely, sort of a distance of three miles, and I landed up in Birmingham, all right,
I got there, and that's what it's like. I got into Birmingham, and the superintendent in charge of
the district had shut the Birmingham depot down completely, because he considered it was
hazardous, you know, to go outside, and he offered to put me up in a hotel for the night, and I said,
well, I said, you know, I would like to try and get back home, because my colleague who was doing
the night shift was coming on, who'd worked the lorry, and he said, well, I'll leave it entirely
after you, and so off I went, and joined the motorway, and driving blizzard, there was snow,
went down there so far, beginning to think I've made a mistake here,
but I went on down, came off at Worcester, and went through Worcester to go over Bromir Downs,
and then I ran into the snow, well, not the snow so much, it was the vehicles were all
parked up, couldn't make it over there, that's what it stopped, I could have gone over there,
and anyway, halfway through the evening, we were standing around waiting for the
ploughs to come and open it up, a fellow in the lorry said to me, I could get over there, he said,
I know if it's a road, it'll remain clear, but I said, well, if you won't have a go, I said,
I'll come behind you, I said, but I'll leave you plenty of distance, I said, you know,
he got to the very top, just about another 20 yards to go, and a car that was parked after
pulled out in front of him, and stopped him straight away, we all had to reverse
back to the end of the queue, and we reversed down there, and I thought, well, this is no use,
we're not going to be here clear for another two or two and a half hours by what the news was, so
anyway, I knew the area well, I knew there was a farmhouse, I thought, if I have a word with
somebody who could point me where the driveway to the, across common wet ground is, could point me
to that, I said, I could reverse into it, and turn around and go back to Worcester, and come down to
Ledbury, turn off your strength, and turn there, which I did, and anyway, I met the old farmer, and
he said, you aim for between those two rush, rush bushes, you know, and he said, that's the road
comes between those, so I did that, and it was a wave, but it was pretty hard going there, but
once I got to Ledbury, it was clear, yeah. Well, you've certainly had some interesting
experiences, a bit hairy. Oh, I have a few. You have. You must, during your career there, you must have met some
interesting characters. Are there any people who sort of stand out, people that you dealt with, helped, etc.?
Well, I dealt with one or two. I met with the Russell Grant once, and then I met with Philip Maddock,
you know, and he, I told him, and he drove, he steered his wife's car to a garage in
Abergavenny, so that, you know, they'd do what was necessary in a few days. Next,
there's a Gilbert show, it was from, you know, so, oh, but, you know,
the two runnies used to be about years ago, Coedians, remember those? I did. And I met the,
the more serious one, the younger one, and he had a truck problem with his car, and I fixed that for him,
so, you'll bet I've got a few. Well, you certainly have. You've met up with quite a few famous,
well-known people, haven't you? Yes. And you always tried to get home to, to Llandrindod, whenever
you caught. Oh, yeah, I would. I'd always get back, give the way for about two hours out, you know,
and say, well, look, I've eaten, and, or you look, where is it? Yes, where are you now?
Well, you've certainly been very, very well travelled. You've mentioned Manchester and
Merthyr. Where's the furthest you ever had to go to, to assist? Well, the furthest that I
think I ever to any cooking miles was during the fuel shortage when the Cuba crisis was on.
That was the, because I couldn't get fuel around Bristol area, the Bristol depot was almost,
had a standstill, you know, but because I got petrol on board, it wanted me to go to pick up a
vehicle on a very cold freezing night, and it was between, supposed to be between Gloucester
and, you know, at the Tembury Wells. It was a place, anyway, I went there,
and I kept going, I couldn't find this vehicle anywhere. And we were all in our areas,
regardless of snow conditions, but round the area, and the black mountains, they had quite a bit of
snow. And I landed up near enough in Oxford, you know, along the old A40, trying to find this person
and I finally found them on the return trip, and they were tucked away around, they found a narrow
road and got down, it was a bit of a waste ground on the side of the road, a way up the road,
completely, but that was it, like, I got them and we had to boil water on East Amphur Band,
which I went out to it then to free my wraps, which were frozen solid on the vehicle.
Well, you've certainly had a lot of adventures, haven't you, or perhaps misadventures,
you've mixed with the rich and famous, you've been all over the place. Did you enjoy your
retirement in Llandrindod? Did you? You retired to Llandrindod?
Sure, I retired in 1994, and I enjoyed my retirement, I spent it going on holidays,
quite a lot, although I'd done a fair bit before, I think I'd covered most areas of the British
House, including the Sillies, you know, and the Arctic and Shetland and those like, and
so I've enjoyed my retirement. Well, that's absolutely fine.
Now, I believe, Ron, you started saying something about two damsels in distress,
would you like to enlarge on that, when they lost something?
Well, it's a bit of a funny subject, really.
These two damsels, we had to call late in the afternoon to go to a course that the keys had
been lost, and I decided to go myself out to the job, because I thought I was a bit more able to
deal with it than the Llandrindod available, and I went out to it, and I went and I published two
young ladies, very attractive ladies, very smartly dressed, you know, and a course, 911, you know,
and which is a sports car, you know, and which to my surprise contained a radio and all in,
you know, radio communication. I don't know what job they did, you know, and I said,
tell me what, I always like to cover what happened before they found it, you know, when they've been,
she said, well, they've been out with two fellows to a pub in Llandr, and they were coming back with
a carafal vine, trying to keep it from spilling, and anyway it fell and it broke,
and they disposed of the glass over the edge, right, well that's not a very good thing to do,
like with animals, you know, but she said they're there, and they had the place, they had the local
garage, you know, Lenovo, you know, Robin, the boy's name, I forget his name now, but
Falconers, they were, do you remember him? Yes, I do. And they'd been out to them, they couldn't do
anything except smash the window, they said, you know, a poor sport car, they didn't want to do that,
you know, but they wanted to get home, and I, if I remember rightly, I said to them, well,
let's get them over, I said, what about these two fellows, I said, where are they now?
Oh, they'd gone early that morning back home, I said, have you been in contact with them, you know,
got the keys off them, got the knowledge of where they think the keys were, and they got them with
them, you know, no, they'd got them with them, they didn't know, anyway, I said to them, well,
I said, they were staying in a little tiny building alongside the old mill, like,
you didn't know it did, and they were there, and they,
said, and it contained one room up, and just the landing upstairs, like,
I said, well, the first thing I did, we searched from the car and all around the ground,
I said, have you searched upstairs, like, no, we didn't, no, downstairs we searched, no, nothing
there, and anyway, I said, well, let's go upstairs, well, there's nothing up there, she said, there's
only like a flat landing, and then, you know, and then nothing there, and I said, well, let's have
a look anyway, and I was going around from corner to corner to check in, and I picked
all the way with an old rusty tin, you know, and I knew straight away that there was something heavier
than what should normally be in that tin, and I said, hang on, I said, oh, she said, don't touch
that, there's a rat poison in there, rat poison in there, I said, well, is there something else here as
well, and we moved to the window, and I said, look, I opened it, and there were the keys inside.
So, Ron, you turned detective as well. So, we went over there, and I tried to get a fast
search of keys from Port in London in between that, you know, to send them down, and, but no joy,
nothing under three days before it would get to that awful, and I was there, she said, oh,
that's a blingin' blow, boy, she said, did that, and she said to her friend, they ratted on us,
they said, last night, something, they did this bit of a hapset over, and so she got on the phone,
she didn't have to strip off. She said, I think, she said, you'll be having bills from the police,
she said, we're wasting time, and also the garage, we're wasting time, and she said, I don't know
what they're gonna charge us, but they were glad to, and I saw them safely on their way, and that was it,
but over there's so many things you could tell, like, you know, I'm sure, yes,
you could write a book on it, indeed, it would be a very interesting book as well,
my word, my word, and how many AA men were actually based where you were in your section?
In this area of London as well, we had an inspector, and he had one man in Llandud,
myself, out of Dolly to start, and another boy up at London, Badron, one in Bill, sorry,
and then there's one in Reader as well, and that was more or less it, for this particular area,
and that's a part of an area of Aberystwyth where they got eight patrols over there, and there were
six in Newtown area, which weren't for us to start, but joined us later on,
yeah, so they got a lot of patrols in those days, you know, and we always think what we did to the
others did to Badron. Well, things have certainly changed, haven't they? Yes, indeed. Well, Ron,
thank you very, very much indeed for your time and for all these fascinating stories, my word,
like you say, you could write a book, you know, you've had a really very interesting life, haven't
you? Right, well, thank you very much, Ron, I'm very, very pleased we've been able to do this at
long last. Okay, thank you very much.